crates/sidecar/src/transport/grpc/README.md, before:

# gRPC Transport

The gRPC transport provides a high-performance binary protocol for communication between the driver and sidecar. **This transport is currently under active development.**

## Protocol Definition

The complete gRPC service definition and message schemas are specified in [`sidecar.proto`](sidecar.proto).

## Core API Methods

The gRPC transport implements the `SidecarTransport` service with four main RPCs.

### `SendBlockEnv`

Sends block environment data to the sidecar using native protobuf typing. Must be called before processing transactions.

- **Request:** `BlockEnvEnvelope`
- **Response:** `BasicAck`

### `SendTransactions`

Sends batch of transactions for processing. Requires prior BlockEnv.

- **Request:** `SendTransactionsRequest`
- **Response:** `SendTransactionsResponse`

### `Reorg`

Handles chain reorganization by removing specified transaction.

- **Request:** `ReorgRequest`
- **Response:** `BasicAck`

### `GetTransactions`

Retrieves transaction results by hash with long-polling support.

- **Request:** `GetTransactionsRequest`
- **Response:** `GetTransactionsResponse`

## Transaction Encoding

For comprehensive transaction type documentation and examples, see the [Transport Transaction Types Documentation](../README.md#transaction-types).

### gRPC-Specific Encoding

Block data and transactions are encoded according to the protobuf schema:

- **BlockEnvEnvelope**: Contains a native `BlockEnv` message plus optional `last_tx_hash` and `n_transactions` values for parity with HTTP.
- **BlockEnv**: Uses strongly typed fields (e.g., `number`, `timestamp`, `gas_limit`) and string-encoded large integers (`difficulty`, `blob_gasprice`).

For transaction fields, protobuf still lacks native large-integer support, so:

- **U256/U128 values**: Encoded as decimal strings (e.g., `"1000000000000000000"`)
- **Addresses & Hashes**: Hex strings with optional `0x` prefix
- **Binary data**: Hex strings with optional `0x` prefix

The `BlockEnvEnvelope`, `BlockEnv`, and `TransactionEnv` messages in [`sidecar.proto`](sidecar.proto) define the precise field layout and encoding expectations.

## Example Usage

```rust
// Example: Sending a legacy transaction
let tx = Transaction {
    hash: "0x1234...".to_string(),
    tx_env: Some(TransactionEnv {
        tx_type: 0, // Legacy
        caller: "0x742d35Cc6634C0532925a3b844B9c7e07e3E23eF4".to_string(),
        gas_limit: 21000,
        gas_price: "20000000000".to_string(), // U128 as decimal string
        kind: "0x8ba1f109551bD432803012645Ac136c9Ca2A1".to_string(),
        value: "1000000000000000000".to_string(), // U256 as decimal string
        data: "0x".to_string(),
        nonce: 42,
        chain_id: Some(1),
        ..Default::default()
    }),
};

let response = client.send_transactions(SendTransactionsRequest {
    transactions: vec![tx],
}).await?;
```

## Configuration

The gRPC transport configuration is currently under development. Configuration options will be added as the implementation progresses.

Commit message:

feat(sidecar): add `getTransaction` endpoint (#206)
* feat: update definitions

* feat: update transports

* feat: tests

* fix: readme, code deduplication

crates/sidecar/src/transport/grpc/README.md, after:

# gRPC Transport

The gRPC transport provides a high-performance binary protocol for communication between the driver and sidecar. **This transport is currently under active development.**

## Protocol Definition

The complete gRPC service definition and message schemas are specified in [`sidecar.proto`](sidecar.proto).

## Core API Methods

The gRPC transport implements the `SidecarTransport` service with four main RPCs.

### `SendBlockEnv`

Sends block environment data to the sidecar using native protobuf typing. Must be called before processing transactions.

- **Request:** `BlockEnvEnvelope`
- **Response:** `BasicAck`

### `SendTransactions`

Sends batch of transactions for processing. Requires prior BlockEnv.

- **Request:** `SendTransactionsRequest`
- **Response:** `SendTransactionsResponse`

### `Reorg`

Handles chain reorganization by removing specified transaction.

- **Request:** `ReorgRequest`
- **Response:** `BasicAck`

### `GetTransactions`

Retrieves transaction results by hash with long-polling support.

- **Request:** `GetTransactionsRequest`
- **Response:** `GetTransactionsResponse`

### `GetTransaction`

Retrieves a single transaction result by hash with long-polling support.

- **Request:** `GetTransactionRequest`
- **Response:** `GetTransactionResponse`
- **Response semantics:** Returns either `result` populated with a `TransactionResult` or `not_found` containing the original hash when the sidecar has no record of the request.

## Transaction Encoding

For comprehensive transaction type documentation and examples, see the [Transport Transaction Types Documentation](../README.md#transaction-types).

### gRPC-Specific Encoding

Block data and transactions are encoded according to the protobuf schema:

- **BlockEnvEnvelope**: Contains a native `BlockEnv` message plus optional `last_tx_hash` and `n_transactions` values for parity with HTTP.
- **BlockEnv**: Uses strongly typed fields (e.g., `number`, `timestamp`, `gas_limit`) and string-encoded large integers (`difficulty`, `blob_gasprice`).

For transaction fields, protobuf still lacks native large-integer support, so:

- **U256/U128 values**: Encoded as decimal strings (e.g., `"1000000000000000000"`)
- **Addresses & Hashes**: Hex strings with optional `0x` prefix
- **Binary data**: Hex strings with optional `0x` prefix

The `BlockEnvEnvelope`, `BlockEnv`, and `TransactionEnv` messages in [`sidecar.proto`](sidecar.proto) define the precise field layout and encoding expectations.

## Example Usage

```rust
// Example: Sending a legacy transaction
let tx = Transaction {
    hash: "0x1234...".to_string(),
    tx_env: Some(TransactionEnv {
        tx_type: 0, // Legacy
        caller: "0x742d35Cc6634C0532925a3b844B9c7e07e3E23eF4".to_string(),
        gas_limit: 21000,
        gas_price: "20000000000".to_string(), // U128 as decimal string
        kind: "0x8ba1f109551bD432803012645Ac136c9Ca2A1".to_string(),
        value: "1000000000000000000".to_string(), // U256 as decimal string
        data: "0x".to_string(),
        nonce: 42,
        chain_id: Some(1),
        ..Default::default()
    }),
};

let response = client.send_transactions(SendTransactionsRequest {
    transactions: vec![tx],
}).await?;
```

## Configuration

The gRPC transport configuration is currently under development. Configuration options will be added as the implementation progresses.
