crates/state-worker/README.md, before:

# `state-worker`

The `state-worker` is a component that pulls in state from a blockchain and commits it to
an external redis database.

The `state-worker` subscribes to the `newHeads` subscription over WS and then for every new block.

- If configured with provider type `parity`: it uses `trace_replayBlockTransactions` to get the state changes made in a
  block which later get collapsed into a single block which gets committed to redis.
- If configured with provider type `geth`: it uses `debug_traceByBlockHash` and `debug_traceByBlockNumber` to get the
  state changes made in a block.

The changes are stored in a `revm::DatabaseRef` compatible format so we can consume the redis cache directly
in the sidecar by calling into it.

## Redis state representation

The redis state is represented as follows:

```
state:account:{address}       → {balance, nonce, code_hash}
state:storage:{address}       → {slot1: value1, slot2: value2, ...}
state:code:{code_hash}        → hex-encoded bytecode
state:{idx}:block             → marker identifying which block the namespace stores
state:meta:latest_block       → latest synced block number
state:state_dump_indices      → number of namespaces in the circular buffer
state:block_hash:{number}     → block hash
state:state_root:{number}     → state root
```

## Using and configuring the `state-worker`

The state worker requires `--ws-url` for the Ethereum WebSocket endpoint, `--redis-url` for the Redis
database, and `--file-to-genesis` to preload the initial state from a file. Optional flags include:

- `--redis-namespace` to change the key namespace (defaults to `state`).
- `--start-block` to override the resume position derived from `state:meta:latest_block`.
- `--trace-timeout-secs` to tune the timeout for `debug_traceBlockBy*` calls (default 30 seconds).

Commit message:

feat(sidecar): Adapt sidecar to MDBX state worker

crates/state-worker/README.md, after:

# `state-worker`

The `state-worker` is a component that pulls in state from a blockchain and commits it to
an external mdbx database.

The `state-worker` subscribes to the `newHeads` subscription over WS and then for every new block.

- If configured with provider type `parity`: it uses `trace_replayBlockTransactions` to get the state changes made in a
  block which later get collapsed into a single block which gets committed to mdbx.
- If configured with provider type `geth`: it uses `debug_traceByBlockHash` and `debug_traceByBlockNumber` to get the
  state changes made in a block.

The changes are stored in a `revm::DatabaseRef` compatible format so we can consume the mdbx cache directly
in the sidecar by calling into it.

## Using and configuring the `state-worker`

The state worker requires `--ws-url` for the Ethereum WebSocket endpoint, `--mdbx-path` for the MDBX
disk path, and `--file-to-genesis` to preload the initial state from a file. Optional flags include:

- `--start-block` to override the resume position derived from `state:meta:latest_block`.
- `--trace-timeout-secs` to tune the timeout for `debug_traceBlockBy*` calls (default 30 seconds).
